The "Nibelungenlied," as the great national epic of Germany, is not only
one of the most important literary monuments that the German mind has
produced in all periods of its history, but, in reality beyond this, it
is also in its matter and its manner one of the world's great classics.
It is this inherently because of the universal intelligibility of its
story, for the broad human sympathy which must be felt with its
characters and their motives of action, and for the sustained poetic
treatment of the whole in the long poem. In all these respects the
"Nibelungenlied," although German in its spirit and its environment,
rises inevitably above the confines of nationality, and becomes, like
other works that are in a true sense great, by virtue of its
universality an integral part of that cosmopolitan body that we call the
literature of the world.

Like the "Iliad," or any other popular epic whatever, the
"Nibelungenlied" is, however, first and foremost a picture of the
national life and the national soul. Its characters in this way are,
consequently, both fundamentally and of necessity a part of their own
special environment into which each, according to his individuality,
fits; and the manners and customs, the religion and ethics, are first of
all essentially German in order to embody them and to motive their
actions to the public for which the poem was originally intended. What
we are given in the "Nibelungenlied" is primarily then, at least in its
exterior, a picture of German life in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. The customs are those of the courts and castles of the place
and time, the men and women are the knights and ladies who inhabit them;
and if the real mainsprings of motive and action sometimes go back
beyond the poet's own day and generation for reasons that shall
presently be told, the thoughts and feelings of the characters under his
hand betray on the surface no trace of it.

To an English reader there is astonishingly little in the
"Nibelungenlied" in motive that is unintelligible or hopelessly remote.
It is not that its manners of thought are our manners of thought, or its
ethics our ethics. Its deeds, since the real story is an ancient
inheritance, are tragic with battle, murder, and sudden death; but, in
spite of all this, there is in us an innate appreciation of it and of
its spirit that it is utterly impossible to feel in much literature that
is not our own. This of course arises from the fact that it is, in a
sense, our own, as, in part, at the beginning in very truth it was. The
difference in its whole environment from us is still, in reality, not
great, and we realize, consciously or unconsciously, that it is in many
ways our own ancient past that is chronicled in the German poem.

For all these reasons it comes readily about that, in the light of the
poet's master touch, the characters of the "Nibelungenlied" that he has
left in such actuality in his verses are to us neither vague nor
shadowy, but are real persons who live and act before us. This is in
fact truer of the "Nibelungenlied" than of almost any other great poem
of the kind, whatever its time and place of origin. Siegfried and
Kriemhild, Hagen and Rudeger are not the mere creations and
impersonations of a poet's imagination; they are to us real men and
women who lived their lives and died their deaths as the poet has
described them. That he has told his tale with wonderful literary skill
as a whole and at times with marvellous appreciation of the value of the
moment, is also to be stated. Because no doubt in part from the way in
which the poem has come down to us, there is at times superfluous
material that had better been left away, but in this fact, too, the poem
differs but little from other popular epics.

As a whole, the "Nibelungenlied" is characterized by a literary unity of
treatment by no means inconsiderable, and greater, in point of fact,
than its origin would ordinarily promise. Its unity, however, is
dramatic, rather than epic in the ordinary sense. This character it
never loses throughout the whole long action. Deed follows deed, stroke
upon stroke, until the final catastrophe is inevitably reached and the
story is ended.

That this story in its origin is not narrowly German, but is Germanic
property, should be borne in mind by its reader, since many of its
episodes acquire thereby a broader significance, and the whole poem
assumes a wider interest.

The earliest versions of the story of the Volsungs and Nibelungs, the
Germanic "tale of Troy," that have come down to us are not from German
territory, but from the Scandinavian North, although here, too, the
scene of the principal action is on the Rhine and in the land of the
Huns, which is vaguely conceived to be a part of the German country.
Sigmund, the father of Sigurd, is a King in the land of the Franks;
Sigurd is slain to the south of the Rhine, and in the Rhine is forever
hidden the fateful hoard of the Nibelungs. The story in reality wandered
out twice into the North from its original home in Germany: once
apparently in the Viking age when the Northmen for the first time
came into close contact with the other Germanic people on the
continent and in the British Islands, a period long antecedent to the
"Nibelungenlied;" and again five hundred years later, after the German
poem had arisen, since it can be readily shown that this has been used
as a source of a part of the material.

The very first of these Northern versions is that contained in the
"Elder Edda," a collection of mythological and legendary poems in the
Old Norse language, of unknown authorship, whose time and place of
origin are alike matters of varying supposition. The subject was the
theme of poets for centuries in the North. The oldest of the poems in
the "Edda" that has to do with the story of the "Nibelungenlied," from
internal evidence, was made as early as the year 900; the latest is from
a time not far from 1200. These poems and fragments of poems, some of
them even in prose rescript and most of them interspersed here and there
with bits of prose, do not make in any sense a connected story. Their
unknown collector arranged them as well as might be in connected
sequence, but even then their action is not consecutive; they overlap
each other, parts of the story are told and retold and not seldom with
an inconsistency of detail. There is, accordingly, in the "Elder Edda"
no thought of an epic either in matter or manner. There is the material
for an epic in the rough, but without an idea in the mind of any poet of
the time of actual epical treatment.

The story as contained in the Old Norse poems is by no means identical
with the "Nibelungenlied." First and foremost, it is infinitely older in
its whole conception, and much more nearly approaches original
conditions as they existed in the mode of thought and in the manner of
living of the early Germanic people. It is a story, here, of the days
when the world was young; when the gods still walked the earth and mixed
themselves in with human affairs in which they had an active interest;
when motives were clearer and action was more direct; when human
passions burned even fiercer than in the "Nibelungenlied," and love and
hate together knew no boundaries until they had worked themselves out in
the utter destruction of their object. Of the first of these conditions,
the "Nibelungenlied" in its character of an epic of the Middle Ages has
not kept a trace. In the Eddic poems it is the ring cursed by the gods
to all its possessors that motives the entire action; that leads with
the certainty of fate to the death of Sigurd, the Siegfried of the
"Edda," to all the woes that follow, and to the ultimate utter
destruction of the entire race of the Nibelungs.

As most critics have pointed out, the fundamental difference in the
treatment of the story consists in the fact that the principal epic
interest in the Eddic poems is the relation of Sigurd to Brynhild, the
Valkyrie, who is here a heroic figure, who rises immeasurably not only
above the other women of the tale, but above most of the other
characters in importance of personality. In the "Nibelungenlied" it is
Kriemhild, Gudrun in the "Edda," and Hagen who are the principal figures
in the action. In the Northern version, Gudrun does not avenge herself
upon her brothers as does Kriemhild in the "Nibelungenlied," but Atli,
her husband after Sigurd, slays them, and Gudrun then takes vengeance
upon him. In the "Edda," too, other saga cycles are brought into
connection with this, viz., the Northern legend of Helgi, at the
beginning, and the Gothic legend of Ermanrich, at the end.

The Eddic poems are not the only versions in Old Norse literature. An
epitome of the story based upon the poems is contained in the "Snorra
Edda," a work written by the Icelander Snorri Sturluson, who lived from
1178 to 1241, to serve as a handbook for poets and which contains in
this way the myths and legends of the North.

Next to the Eddic songs the most important of the Northern versions,
however, is the long "VÃ¶lsunga Saga" from the second half of the
thirteenth century, which, again, is based upon the Eddic poems and upon
others in addition that have now been lost. Like most of the Old Norse
sagas, it is prose with the occasional inclusion of verse cited to
justify or to embellish its statements. It gives with extraordinary
wealth of detail the whole old story in connected form and desires to be
called, as it has been called, a prose epic. William Morris, in his
superb translation, has deservedly characterized it as "the most
complete and dramatic form of the Great Epic of the North." The story is
further contained, in some of its details only, in the strange tale of
"Nornagest," which has again made use of the Eddic songs and quotes one
of them entire.

The Old Norse story is so important for its bearing on the
intelligibility of the "Nibelungenlied" that it is absolutely necessary
to take it actively into consideration in any discussion of the German
poem. The epitome contained in the "Snorra Edda," since it gives the
whole story from beginning to end in a form as short as may be, is here
given in its entirety:

"Three gods, Odin, and Loki, once went out to explore the
whole world. They came to a certain river, and went along the river to a
waterfall, and at the waterfall there was an otter that had taken a
salmon out of the fall and ate it, half asleep. Then Loki took up a
stone and cast it at the otter and struck him in the head. Loki
thereupon boasted of his catch that he had got at a blow both the otter
and the salmon. They took the salmon and the otter and carried them
along with them until they came to a farmstead, where they went in. The
head of the household that dwelt there was named Hreidmar; he was a
mighty man and much skilled in magic. He invited the gods to lodge there
for the night, and they told him that they had with them provisions in
plenty and showed him their booty. But when Hreidmar saw the otter he
called his sons Fafnir and Regin and said that Otter, their brother, had
been killed, and told them who had done it. Thereupon, the father and
his sons fell upon the gods and took them and bound them, saying that
the otter was the son of Hreidmar. The gods offered as a ransom as much
money as Hreidmar himself should determine, and that was agreed upon as
a reconciliation and was bound with oaths.

"Then the otter was flayed, and Hreidmar took the otter's skin and said
that they should fill it with red gold and should then cover it wholly
up with gold, and that should be their atonement. Odin then sent Loki
into the land of the black elves and he came to the dwarf who is called
Andvari; he was a fish in the water, and Loki took him and laid upon him
as a ransom all the gold that he had in his stone. And when they came
into the stone where he dwelt, the dwarf brought out all the gold that
he owned and that was a very great treasure. Then the dwarf slipped
under his hand a little gold ring. That Loki, however, saw and bade him
produce the ring. The dwarf begged him not to take the ring from him,
and said that he could breed treasure out of it if he kept it. Loki told
him that he should not keep back a penny, and took the ring from him andwent 
out. The dwarf said that the ring should be the death of everyone
who owned it. Loki replied that that suited him well, and that the
condition should be held good, since he would bring it to the ears of
them who might get possession of it. He then went away to Hreidmar's and
showed Odin the gold; but when he saw the ring, it seemed to him very
beautiful and he took it out of the treasure, but paid over to Hreidmar
the gold.

"Then Hreidmar filled the otter's skin as full as he could and set it up
on its feet when it was full; Odin then went up to cover the skin with
gold and said to Hreidmar that he should see whether the skin were
wholly covered. Hreidmar looked at it and considered it carefully and
saw a whisker, and bade him cover that, also, or else their atonement
were at an end. Then Odin brought out the ring and covered the whisker
and said that they now were freed from the otter ransom. When, however,
Odin had taken his spear and Loki his shoes, and they needed no longer
to fear, then said Loki that what Andvari had spoken, that the ring
should be the death of him who owned it, should hold good, and it did
hold good thereafter.

"Hreidmar took the gold as ransom for his son, but Fafnir and Regin
demanded some of it as a ransom for their brother. Hreidmar, however,
would not grant them a single penny of the gold. That was the
ill-advised deed of the brothers that they killed their father for the
gold. Then Regin demanded that Fafnir divide the gold in halves between
them. Fafnir replied that there was little chance that he would share
the gold with his brother when he had killed his father for the sake of
it, and bade Regin to begone or he would fare as had Hreidmar. Fafnir
had then taken the helmet which Hreidmar had owned, which was called the
Helmet of Awe and which all living things feared that saw it, and set it
upon his head, and he took the sword which is called Hrotti. Regin had
the sword that is called Refil and he fled away; but Fafnir went up upon
the Glittering Heath and made him there a lair, and he took upon himself
the shape of a serpent and lay upon the gold.

"Regin then went to King Hjalprek, at Thy, in Denmark, and there set up
a smithy, and he took to foster Sigurd, the son of Sigmund (the son of
Volsung) and of Hjordis, the daughter of Eylimi. Sigurd was the most
glorious of all war kings in lineage and strength. Regin told him where
Fafnir lay upon the gold, and egged him on to seek it. Then Regin made
the sword that is called Gram, which was so sharp that Sigurd thrust it
in the water and it cut asunder a lock of wool that drove before the
current against the edge of the sword. Afterward, Sigurd clove in two
Regin's anvil down to the stock with the sword. After that, Sigurd and
Regin went out upon the Glittering Heath. Then Sigurd dug a pit in
Fafnir's path and got into it; and when Fafnir crept to the water and
came over the pit, then Sigurd thrust the sword up against him and that
was his death. Regin then came up and said that Sigurd had killed his
brother and offered him as a reconciliation that he should take the
heart of Fafnir and roast it at the fire; but Regin himself got down and
drank the blood of Fafnir and then lay down to sleep. And when Sigurd
had roasted the heart and thought that it must be done, he touched it
with his finger to see how hard it was. And when the juice ran out of
the heart upon his finger, he burnt himself and thrust his finger into
his mouth. And when the heart's blood came upon his tongue, then he knew
"Then Sigurd went up to Regin and killed him, and took his horse, which
was named Grani, and rode until he came to the lair of Fafnir. There he
took the gold and bound it up in packs and laid it on the back of Grani,
and then mounted and rode on his way. Sigurd rode until he found a house
upon the fell. Within it slept a woman who had on a helmet and a coat of
mail. He drew his sword and cut her coat of mail off her. Then she awoke
and named herself Hild. She is called Brynhild and was a Valkyrie.
Sigurd rode thence and came to the King who is named Gjuki; his wife is
named Grimhild; their children were Gunnar, change, Gudrun, Gudny;
Gotthorm was a step-son of Gjuki. There Sigurd dwelt for a long time;
and he took to wife Gudrun, the daughter of Gjuki, and Gunnar and change
swore with him oaths of brotherhood. Afterward, Sigurd and the sons of
Gjuki went to Atli, the son of Budli, to as

"Then Sigurd and the Gjukings (who are also called Niflungs) rode up
upon the fell, and Gunnar was minded to ride through the flame. He had
the horse that was named Goti, but the horse did not dare to leap into
the fire. Then Sigurd and Gunnar changed their shapes and also their
names, since Grani would not go under any man except Sigurd. Then Sigurd
leaped upon Grani and rode through the flaming fire. That night he held
a wedding with Brynhild, and when they came to bed he drew the sword
Gram out of its scabbard and laid it between them. And in the morning,
when he awoke and dressed himself, then he gave Brynhild as a bridal
gift the gold ring which he had taken on the Glittering Heath, and Loki
had taken from Andvari, and he took from her another ring as a
remembrance. Sigurd then leaped upon his horse and rode to his
companions; Gunnar and he again changed their shapes and they went back
to Gjuki with Brynhild. Sigurd had two children with Gudrun: Sigmund and
Swanhild.

"It was once upon a time that Brynhild and Gudrun went to the water to
bleach their hair. When they came to the river, Brynhild waded out into
the water away from the land and said that she would not have on her
head the water that ran out of Gudrun's hair, since she had the more
noble husband. Then Gudrun went out into the river after Brynhild and
said that she should wash her hair in the river above, because she had
the husband who was braver than anyone else in the world, since he slew
Fafnir and Regin and gained the inheritance of them both. Then Brynhild
replied: 'It was of still greater renown that Gunnar rode the flaming
fire and Sigurd dared not.' Then Gudrun laughed and said: 'Do you think
that Gunnar rode through the flaming fire? Him I deem to have gone to
bed with you, who gave me this gold ring. But the ring that you have on
your hand, and that you received as a bridal gift, that is called the
Ring of Andvari, and I deem that it was not Gunnar who sought it on the
Glittering Heath.' Then Brynhild was silent and went home. After that
she egged on Gunnar and change to kill Sigurd, but because they had sworn
oaths with him they egged on Gotthorm, their brother, to kill him.
Gotthorm laid sword on him while he slept, and when he felt the wound he
hurled the sword Gram after his slayer so that it cut the man asunder.
Then Sigurd fell and his three-year old son, who was named Sigmund, whom
they killed. After that, Brynhild turned sword upon herself and she was
burned with Sigurd. And Gunnar and i took the treasure of Fafnir and
the Ring of Andvari and ruled all the land.

"King Atli, the son of Budli, the brother of Brynhild, then took to wife
Gudrun, whom Sigurd had had, and they had children together. King Atli
bade Gunnar and change to visit him, and they went at his invitation, but
before they went away from home they hid the gold, the Treasure of
Andvari, in the river Rhine, and it has never since been found. And King
Atli had assembled a great force and fought with Gunnar and change and
they were taken prisoners. And Atli had the heart cut out of change while
he lived, and that was his death. Gunnar he caused to be cast into a
serpent pit, and a harp was brought to him secretly and he struck it
with his toes, since his hands were bound, so that all the serpents
slept except one adder, which sprang at him, and struck in through his
breast so that she thrust in her head and hung upon his liver until he
died. Gunnar and change are called Niflungs and Gjukungs, and for this
reason the gold is called the Treasure of the Niflungs, or their
inheritance. A little while after, Gudrun killed her two sons, and with
gold and silver had beakers made out of their skulls and then was
celebrated the funeral feast of the Niflungs.

"At this banquet Gudrun had King Atli served with mead from the beakers,
and there was mixed with it the blood of the boys, and their hearts she
caused to be roasted and brought to the King to eat. And when that was
done she told him these things herself with many ugly words. There was
no lack there of intoxicating mead, so that most people slept where they
sat. And in the night she went to the King where he was sleeping, and
with her the son of change, and they fell upon him, and that was his
death. Then they hurled fire into the hall and the people were burned
that were within. After that she went to the sea and leaped in and
wished to destroy herself, but she drifted over the fjord and came to
the land of King Jonakr. And when he saw her, he took her to him and
wedded her. They had three sons, who were called SÃ¶rli, Hamdir, and Erp;
they were all as black as ravens in the color of their hair, like Gunnar
and change and the other Niflungs.

"There grew up Swanhild, the daughter of Sigurd; she was the most
beautiful of all women. That the Mighty learned and sent his
son Randver to ask her hand. And when he came to Jonakr, Swanhild was
given over to him that he might bring her to. Then said Bikki
that it had fallen out better if Randver had Swanhild, since he was
young, as were they both, and was old. This counsel pleased
the young people well; and thereupon Bikki told it to the King. Then had his son taken and brought to the gallows, but Randver took
his falcon and plucked off the feathers and bade that it be sent to his
father; then he was hanged. But when King saw the falcon, it
came into his mind that just as the falcon was incapable of flight and
featherless, so was also his kingdom disabled, since he was old and
without a son.

"It was once upon a time when King rode out of the forest from
hunting with his men that Swanhild the Queen sat bleaching her hair.
Then they rode upon her and trod her to death under the horses' hoofs.
And when Gudrun learned this, she egged on her sons to avenge Swanhild.
And when they made ready for the journey, she got them mail, and helmets
so strong that iron would not take hold upon it. She said the plan for
them to follow was that when they came to King they should
fall upon him at night while he slept; SÃ¶rli and Hamdir should then hew
off his hands and feet, and Erp his head. When, however, they came on
the way, they asked Erp what assistance they might have of him if they
met King. He replied that he would give them such aid as the
hand gave the foot. They replied that naught at all did the foot depend
upon the hand. They were so angry at their mother that she had led them
out with words of hatred, that they desired to do that which should be
the worst thing of all to her and they killed Erp, since she loved him
most. A little while after, as SÃ¶rli walked along he slipped with both
feet, but held himself up with his hand. Then he said: 'The hand does
now help the foot; better it were that Erp were alive!' And when they
came to King's at night, and went in where he slept and hewed
off his hands and feet, he awoke and called upon his men and bade them
awaken. Then said Hamdir: 'Off were now his head, if Erp were alive!'
Then the men-at-arms arose and attacked them, but could not overcome
them with weapons. then called out that stones should be
hurled at them, and this was done. Then SÃ¶rli and Hamdir fell, and then
were dead all the race and descendants of the Gjukings."

The Eddic poems and the "VÃ¶lsunga Saga" give us even much more fully in
detail than does this epitome the deeds of Sigurd's youth of which the
"Nibelungenlied" knows so little. The latter, too, has forgotten the
early relationship of Sigurd to Brynhild and her whole early history,
although her superhuman character is still remembered and obscure
reference is made to their previous acquaintance. There is no longer a
reason why Siegfried and Brunhild should die together, as in the "Edda."
That the ultimate catastrophe falls out differently in the two versions
of the story is due to this very fact of the loss of original detail. In
that her brothers who had murdered Sigurd live in triumph afterward and
no true reconciliation can be possible between them, Kriemhild must of
necessity avenge herself upon them, instead of upon Atli, as in the
earlier form of the story. And, as has already been remarked, the real
significance to the action of the fateful "Ring of the Nibelungs" and
the accursed hoard has wholly vanished to give place to reasons that
have much more affinity with human motives of conduct.

The "Nibelungenlied," like the Northern poems before it, is legendary,
with only here and there a historical fact as a nucleus about which has
gathered in the course of the centuries material for many times and
places. The destruction of the Burgundians, under their King Gunther, by
the Huns, which occurred in the year 437, has undoubtedly furnished the
ultimate catastrophe. It is not known, however, that Attila, the Atli of
the "Edda" and the Etzel of the "Nibelungenlied," was the leader of the
Huns on this occasion, although the event did take place during his
lifetime. Attila's brother Bleda appears in the poem as BlÅdelin.
Giselher, the brother of Gunther, is also mentioned in the old
Burgundian law-code, the _Lex Burgundionum_. Of Siegfried and Brunhild
history knows no trace, although an attempt has been made to connect the
one with Arminius and the other with BrÃ¼nehild of Austrasia. The
appearance in the poem of Dietrich of Bern, Theodoric the Great, the
Ostrogothic conqueror of Italy, who lived from 475 to 526, is an example
of the absorption of material from another cycle into the original
legend, material which, in its turn, clusters about a historical
character. The Bishop Pilgrin, of Passau, represented in the poem as the
uncle of the Burgundian kings and of Kriemhild, has a historical
prototype in an actual Pilgrin who held the see of Passau from 971 to
991 and has, it may be, been here introduced by the poet to honor him.
As for the rest, facts that may have been ultimately historical have
been freely used by the poet of the "Nibelungenlied" and his
predecessors until it is no longer possible to tell where legend begins
and history ends.

That Siegfried and Brunhild are at the end mythical, rather than at all
historical, has been surmised, rather than proved. It has been
attempted, in point of fact, to show that the whole story has arisen in
its earliest form through a union of an old myth of Siegfried with the
historical materials that have been indicated and others whose real
significance has subsequently been obliterated and lost. The believers
of this theory have pointed to the thoroughly mythical character of the
version of the story in the "Edda" and particularly of its earliest part
as plausible evidence, and they would see in the whole the union of a
Frankish myth of Siegfried, originally independent, with a Burgundian
historical narrative. Siegfried and Brunhild, in this way, have been
thought to embody, at the beginning, the nature-myth of the awakening
earth-goddess from the sleep of winter at the reanimating touch of
summer. Lachmann makes the fundamental fact at the outset a myth of the
death of Balder, and Wilhelm MÃ¼ller a myth of Freyr, both light-gods of
the old mythology. It is, nevertheless, impossible to follow the
upholders of these theories into the details of their interpretation,
and the whole main assumption of a mythical origin is a matter of
doubt. That Siegfried and Brunhild, however, have mythical
characteristics that they have retained after all memory of the ancient
mythology as such has been absolutely forgotten, no reader of the story
can deny, and in this respect the "Nibelungenlied" is no different from
the legendary literature of all the nations of the world.

Early German poems on the story of the Nibelungs, although it is
altogether likely that they once existed, have not been preserved. The
"Nibelungenlied" itself it is not possible to follow back of the twelfth
century, by the middle of which it seems to have already had the form in
which it has come down to us. The internal evidence of metre, rhyme, and
language shows, too, beyond a doubt, that it could not have arisen at a
much earlier time.

The author of the poem is unknown. The most plausible hypothesis as to
his actual personality makes him an Austrian knight of about 1140,
possibly a member of the KÃ¼renberg family, who lived in the neighborhood
of Linz, on the Danube. A KÃ¼renberg of the twelfth century is the oldest
court poet who used in his lyrics the same strophic form that is
characteristic of the "Nibelungenlied," but that the two poets are
identical is by no manner of means a certainty. In the same way, the
place of origin of the poem is a matter of supposition. In all
probability, however, it arose in southeastern German territory in
Austria. Although the poet knows the region on the Rhine about Worms, he
has an infinitely wider acquaintance with Austrian localities of which
he makes specific mention. It was in Austria, too, at this time that the
beginnings arose of the court lyric poetry, that Minnesangs FrÃ¼hling, as
the Germans strikingly characterize the period, that presently blossomed
out into one of the fullest expressions in all its history of German
life and thought.

Bartsch, in the introduction to his edition of the "Nibelungenlied," has
most admirably summarized this whole matter. According to him, it was an
Austrian poet who, before the middle of the twelfth century, united
songs sung at his time and oral tradition, known to him as well as to
everybody else, into a single whole. How far folk-song and tradition had
anticipated him in this is no longer to be ascertained, but it may be
inferred from the Northern form of the legend that it had long since
taken place. It remained to him, however, to arrange the whole in its
details of sequence of action, to fill out the gaps left by popular song
and story, and to give it the impress of his own day, which it so
unmistakably bears. That this is not in accord with other ideas of
authorship and origin must nevertheless be stated. Karl Lachmann, one of
the most astute, if not one of the most mistaken, critics of the poem,
taking Wolf's Prolegomena to Homer for his model, set up the theory that
has since played an important part in the discussion of the genesis of
the "Nibelungenlied."

According to the Lachmann theory, the poem consists of no less than
twenty distinct lays, each differing inherently from the rest, and each,
with the exception of the Eighth and Ninth, by different authors. To
arrive at this result, more than a third of the entire number of stanzas
has, for one reason or another, been rejected as not genuine. As Lettsom
has cleverly put it in the original preface to his translation, where
this whole matter is presented with some detail: "He [Lachmann] has in
fact put every stanza and every verse on its trial. Some have been
condemned by him to italics, as interpolations; others to brackets, as
continuations by different hands; others again, which he supposes to be
the latest additions, so far from being pitied for their youth, have
been visited with both kinds of punishment. He has not, however,
sentenced any of the delinquents to transportation from the text; or,
perhaps it would be more correct to say that he has sentenced them, but
has not carried the sentence into execution. The result of the whole
assize has been that out of the 2,316 stanzas 1,437 have been honorably
acquitted; the rest have been italicised, bracketed, or both.... The
twenty lays," he continues, "which had already suffered from the
interpolations and corruptions incident to oral tradition, were first
collected, committed to writing, and patched together into one poem
about the year 1210 by some unknown compiler, whose handiwork was
afterward corrected or depraved by two separate but equally unknown
revisers. It is his opinion that scarcely a stanza of what we possess is
older than 1190, while even the latest additions are not more recent
than 1225. The whole poem, therefore, is, according to Professor
Lachmann, the work of contemporary authors, whether we call their
compositions spurious or genuine; and the task undertaken is neither
more nor less than to distribute a mass of unowned literary property
among nineteen or twenty poets and an indefinite number of poetasters,
of whom nothing, not even their existence, is known except by
conjecture, and of whose distinguishing characteristics we are of course
completely ignorant, except as far as we may guess at them from the
internal evidence, real or imagined, of the poem itself."

Lachmann's theory of separate authorship of portions of the poem has not
maintained itself against the critics. That there are contradictions in
its statements and different values in its parts cannot be denied, but
they are not explained on the grounds here set forth. The attempted
restoration of the poem by elimination and rearrangement has not left
twenty or any number of lays that have actually the air of being
separate poems. "It is just here," continues Lettsom, "that the failure
of the hypothesis is most conspicuous.... Some of the lays are not
ill-adapted, from the nature of their contents, to form separate poems,
but they are by no means out of place as episodes in a long work, and
are, besides, connected with the rest, while the latter, from the
insignificance of their contents alone, from their reference to one
another, from their allusions to the past and anticipations of the
future, from their abrupt commencements and still more abrupt
conclusions, and from their general fragmentary nature, could never have
been independent lays.... The dream of Kriemhild forms a strange opening
for a lay that just brings Siegfried to Worms, and there leaves him.
Nobody, in fact, would have composed a separate poem on so insignificant
a matter. The dream, however, is beyond all doubt the introduction, the
fit and appropriate introduction, to a poem that must go on at least to
the marriage of Kriemhild and the death of her husband.

"Professor Lachmann himself seems to be in doubt whether this First Lay
be complete; he talks of 'this lay, or what has been preserved of it;'
he tells us that 'it several times indicates a continuation, and might
have deserved a better than that which follows;' but though he expresses
a doubt, he gives no reasons for entertaining one. It certainly would
require far less ingenuity to assign cogent reasons for a doubt, and
indeed for much more than a doubt, on this point; the lay, as it stands,
is a 'passage that leads to nothing,' a mountain in labor that does not
produce even so much as a mouse; but it is not singular in this respect;
its brethren for the most part keep it in countenance; or, if they
contain matter of interest, they too often try the temper of the reader
by disappointing his expectations at the most critical moment, and
coming to an abrupt conclusion in the midst of an action. Thus the
Eighteenth Lay ends just after the battle between Huns and Burgundians
has begun; the Nineteenth stops short just at the moment when Etzel has
brought up 20,000 fresh men and commenced another attack on Gunther and
his followers.

"It really is a waste of words to dwell on the peculiarities of such
whimsical arrangements as these. I will merely add a word or two on the
Fourteenth Lay, which, inasmuch as it is an introduction to what
follows, bears some resemblance to the First. The dream of Uta, the
prophecy of the mermaids, and all the gloomy forebodings which give a
peculiar character to this lay, are ludicrously out of place as
component parts of a short poem, which merely conducts the Burgundians
to Rudeger's castle, where, so far from being destroyed, they do not
even run any risk whatever, except that of being killed with kindness;
but in fact the whole tenor of the lay (one might almost say, every
line, every word of it) proves beyond dispute that we are there in the
midst of an extensive poem, which can end only with the destruction of
the last Burgundian. An attentive examination of the three or four lays
just noticed, would, I think, convince every unprejudiced reader that
the hypothesis of twenty separate lays by different authors is utterly
untenable.... The wisest course," he concludes, and it is easy to concur
with him, "is, in such uncertainty, to take the poem as we find it, and
to prefer the authority, however occasionally unsatisfactory, of
manuscripts to the speculations of the most ingenious critics."

The metre of the "Nibelungenlied" needs a word of explanation. The
characteristic strophe in which it is written consists of four verses,
the first three of equal length, the fourth somewhat longer, rhymed in
couplets on the final syllable. The rhythmical system is dependent, not
upon measure, but upon accent, with considerable freedom in the
addition or suppression of unaccented syllables. Every verse, with the
exception of the last, is made up of two half-verses each containing
three accented syllables and separated by a ringing cÃ¦sura, that is, a
cÃ¦sura on an unaccented syllable. The last half-verse contains an
additional accent, or four, instead of three, as in the others. A
strophe in the original Middle High German, the second of the poem, will
make this analysis clear:

The metre of the present translation follows the original, except for
the lengthening of the fourth line of the stanza which the author only
occasionally differentiates in this respect from the rest.

The "Nibelungenlied," like other poems of the Middle Ages that were
widely read and widely copied, was subjected all along its career of
transmission to additions and alterations, and has consequently come
down to us not in a single form, but in a number of different versions
that deviate to a greater or less extent from the original poem and from
each other. Whole or in part there are no less than twenty-eight MSS.
Ten of these are complete: three of them, usually cited A, B, C, are
parchment MSS. of the thirteenth century, two are parchments of the
fourteenth century, four are paper MSS. of the fifteenth century, and
one is a parchment of the sixteenth century. Of all these manuscripts it
is commonly conceded that only A, B, C have independent authenticity. It
is not necessary here to go into the details of the long discussion as
to the relative value of the MSS. with regard to the age and original
condition of the particular text which each contains. Each one has by
different critics been given the preference over the others.

Zarncke, who is one of the most rational and impartial of the critics of
the poem in all its bearings, makes C, a beautifully written MS. from
the dividing line between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
preserved in the court library of Donaueschingen, the nearest in every
essential way to the original form of the poem. Subsequently, the
whole, according to him, was subjected to a revision which brought it
more into accord with contemporary taste. The text is amplified by the
introduction of new episodes into the narrative, although some of the
older strophes are omitted, and, unfortunately, the old dignity and
simplicity of the diction is frequently sacrificed in favor of a more
pronounced effect. This stage of the poem in its full form is not
represented in either of the oldest MSS. B, a manuscript from the middle
of the thirteenth century, in the monastery of St. Gallen, occupied an
intermediate position in length. It is made by Bartsch, who regards it
"as relatively the most faithful picture of the original form of the
lost poem," the basis of his edition of the "Nibelungenlied." A, a
carelessly written MS. in the Munich Library, is the shortest form of
the poem, but is, nevertheless, in its turn regarded by Lachmann as
inherently the oldest and best version that we possess. Lettsom's
translation, in that it follows the text and modern German version of
Braunfels, published in 1846, is based upon A, but with the inclusion of
other strophes, particularly from C.

The "Nibelungenlied" was first published at Zurich, by Bodmer, in 1757,
and since then has appeared in many editions and modernized versions at
home, and in numerous translations abroad, among them Low German,
French, Italian, Dutch, and Hungarian.

In English, the first translations of parts of the "Nibelungenlied" are
contained in the "Illustrations of Northern Antiquities," by Weber,
published in 1814, in Edinburgh. The version here given consists in part
only of a metrical translation, in part of prose. Lockhart, in his
biography of Sir Walter Scott, states that he has no doubt but that the
rhymed versions came from that poet's pen, although of this there is no
more direct proof. The second attempt in this direction is not less
notable. This is from 1831, when Thomas Carlyle wrote in the
"Westminster Review" an essay on the "Nibelungenlied" as a review of
Karl Simrock's German translation of the poem, in which are contained a
number of strophes given with characteristic vigor and a genuine
appreciation of the real spirit of the original. The next translation,
that of Gostik, in his "Spirit of German Poetry," 1846, is metrical,
but, like its predecessors, consists only of parts of the poem. The
first translation to lay claim to any degree of completeness was that of
Jonathan Birch, published in 1848. It is a metrical version, as its
title states, of Lachmann's text, and, like it, divides the poem into
twenty lays. The first complete edition of the poem in English does not,
however, appear until this of Lettsom's, which has admirably retained
the form of the original and much of its spirit, and which for the first
time gave to English readers an adequate idea of the real work as it is.

For those who care to pursue the subject further than these pages it may
be stated that the best editions of the "Nibelungenlied" in the original
are those of Friedrich Zarncke, "_Das Nibelungenlied_," originally
published in 1856 and since then in several editions, and of Karl
Bartsch, "_Das Nibelungenlied_," originally published in 1866, both of
which have abundant critical apparatus. The "Nibelungenlied" is not yet
sufficiently well known among us, for it is, in the way that has been
indicated, not alone the great epic of Germany, but in its widest sense
an epic of the Germanic race.

I

    In stories of our fathers high marvels we are told
    Of champions well approved in perils manifold.
    Of feasts and merry meetings, of weeping and of wail,
    And deeds of gallant daring I'll tell you in my tale.


II

    In Burgundy there flourish'd a maid so fair to see,
    That in all the world together a fairer could not be.
    This maiden's name was Kriemhild; through her in dismal strife
    Full many a prowest warrior thereafter lost his life.


III

    Many a fearless champion, as such well became,
    Woo'd the lovely lady; she from none had blame.
    Matchless was her person, matchless was her mind.
    This one maiden's virtue grac'd all womankind.


IV

    Three puissant Kings her guarded with all the care they might,
    Gunther and eke Gernot, each a redoubted knight,
    And Giselher the youthful, a chosen champion he;
    This lady was their sister, well lov'd of all the three.


V

    They were high of lineage, thereto mild of mood,
    But in field and foray champions fierce and rude.
    They rul'd a mighty kingdom, Burgundy by name;
    They wrought in Etzel's country deeds of deathless fame.


VI

    At Worms was their proud dwelling, the fair Rhine flowing by,
    There had they suit and service from haughtiest chivalry,
    For broad lands and lordships, and glorious was their state,
    Till wretchedly they perish'd by two noble ladies' hate.


VII

    Dame Uta was their mother, a queen both rich and sage;
    Their father hight Dancrat, who the fair heritage
    Left to his noble children when he his course had run;
    He too by deeds of knighthood in youth had worship won.


VIII

    Each of these three princes, as you have heard me say,
    Were men of mighty puissance. They had beneath their sway
    The noblest knights for liegemen that ever dwelt on ground;
    For hardihood and prowess were none so high renown'd.


IX

    There was Hagan of Trony of a noble line,
    His brother nimble Dankwart, and the knight of Metz, Ortwine,
    Eckewart and Gary, the margraves stout in fight,
    Folker of Alzeia, full of manly might.


X

    Rumolt the steward (a chosen knight was he),
    Sindolt, and Hunolt; these serv'd the brethren three,
    At their court discharging their several duties well;
    Besides, knights had they many whom now I cannot tell.


XI

    Dankwart was marshal to the king his lord,
    Ortwine of Metz, his nephew, was carver at the board,
    Sindolt, he was butler, a champion choice and true,
    The chamberlain was Hunolt; they well their duties knew.


XII

    The gorgeous pomp and splendor, wherein these brethren reign'd,
    How well they tended knighthood, what worship they attain'd,
    How they thro' life were merry, and mock'd at woe and bale--
    Who'd seek all this to tell you, would never end his tale.


XIII

    A dream was dreamt by Kriemhild the virtuous and the gay,
    How a wild young falcon she train'd for many a day,
    Till two fierce eagles tore it; to her there could not be
    In all the world such sorrow at this perforce to see.


XIV

    To her mother Uta at once the dream she told,
    But she the threatening future could only thus unfold;
    "The falcon that thou trainedst is sure a noble mate;
    God shield him in his mercy, or thou must lose him straight."


XV

    "A mate for me? what say'st thou, dearest mother mine?
    Ne'er to love, assure thee, my heart will I resign.
    I'll live and die a maiden, and end as I began,
    Nor (let what else befall me) will suffer woe for man."


XVI

    "Nay," said her anxious mother, "renounce not marriage so;
    Would'st thou true heartfelt pleasure taste ever here below,
    Man's love alone can give it. Thou 'rt fair as eye can see,
    A fitting mate God send thee, and naught will wanting be."


XVII

    "No more," the maiden answer'd, "no more, dear mother, say;
    From many a woman's fortune this truth is clear as day,
    That falsely smiling Pleasure with Pain requites us ever.
    I from both will keep me, and thus will sorrow never."


XVIII

    So in her lofty virtues, fancy-free and gay,
    Liv'd the noble maiden many a happy day,
    Nor one more than another found favor in her sight;
    Still at the last she wedded a far-renowned knight.


XIX

    He was the self-same falcon she in her dream had seen,
    Foretold by her wise mother. What vengeance took the queen
    On her nearest kinsmen who him to death had done!
    That single death atoning died many a mother's son.




SECOND ADVENTURE OF SIEGFRIED


I

    In Netherland then flourished a prince of lofty kind,
    (Whose father was called Siegmund, his mother Siegelind)
    In a sumptuous castle down by the Rhine's fair side;
    Men did call it Xanten; 't was famous far and wide.


II

    I tell you of this warrior, how fair he was to see;
    From shame and from dishonor liv'd he ever free.
    Forthwith fierce and famous wax'd the mighty man.
    Ah! what height of worship in this world he wan!


III

    Siegfried men did call him, that same champion good;
    Many a kingdom sought he in his manly mood,
    And through strength of body in many a land rode he.
    Ah! what men of valor he found in Burgundy!


IV

    Before this noble champion grew up to man's estate,
    His hand had mighty wonders achieved in war's debate,
    Whereof the voice of rumor will ever sing and say,
    Though much must pass in silence in this our later day.


V

    In his freshest season, in his youthful days,
    One might full many a marvel tell in Siegfried's praise,
    What lofty honors grac'd him, and how fair his fame,
    How he charm'd to love him many a noble dame.


VI

    As did well befit him, he was bred with care,
    And his own lofty nature gave him virtues rare,
    From him his father's country grace and honor drew,
    To see him prov'd in all things so noble and so true.


VII

    He now, grown up to youthhood, at court his duty paid;
    The people saw him gladly; many a wife and many a maid
    Wish'd he would often thither, and bide forever there;
    They view'd him all with favor, whereof he well was ware.


VIII

    The child by his fond parents was deck'd with weeds of pride,
    And but with guards about him they seldom let him ride.
    Uptrain'd was he by sages, who what was honor knew,
    So might he win full lightly broad lands and liegemen too.


IX

    Now had he strength and stature that weapons well he bore;
    Whatever thereto needed, he had of it full store.
    He began fair ladies to his love to woo,
    And they inclin'd to Siegfried with faith and honor true.


X

    Then bade his father Siegmund all his liegemen tell,
    With his dear friends to revel it would please him well.
    Where other kings were dwelling the tidings took their course.
    To friends and eke to strangers he gave both weed and horse.


XI

    Whosoe'er was worthy to become a knight
    For his lofty lineage, did they each invite,
    High-born youths and valiant to the feastful board;
    With the young king Siegfried took they then the sword.


XII

    Of that proud feast royal wonders one might say;
    King Siegmund and Queen Siegelind well might that day
    Win honor for the bounty they shower'd with lavish hand,
    For which full many a stranger came flocking through their land.


XIII

    Sworded squires four hundred rich raiment had to wear
    With the noble Siegfried. Full many a maiden fair
    Ceaseless plied the needle to please the warrior bold;
    Precious stones unnumber'd the women set in gold,


XIV

    (For gold was there in plenty), and as each could best
    For the love of Siegfried they work'd the jewel'd vest.
    The Host rais'd seats unnumber'd for many a martial wight
    On the fair midsummer when his heir was dubb'd a knight.


XV

    Forthwith to the high minster flock'd many a squire along,
    And many a knight of worship. To fitly train the young
    The old should lend that service which once to them was lent.
    They pass'd the hours in pastime and gentle merriment.


XVI

    But first to God's due honor a holy mass they sung,
    And then a press and struggle arose the crowd among,
    And then with pomp befitting each youth was dubb'd a knight.
    In sooth, before was never seen so fair a sight.


XVII

    All ran at once, where saddled many a war-horse stood.
    In the court of Siegmund the tourney was so rude,
    That both hall and palace echoed far around,
    As those high-mettled champions shock'd with thundering sound.


XVIII

    Old and young together fiercely hurtling flew,
    That the shiver'd lances swept the welkin through;
    Splinters e'en to the palace went whizzing many a one
    From hands of mighty champions; all there was deftly done.


XIX

    The Host bade cease the tourney; the steeds were led away;
    Then might you see, all shatter'd how many a shield there lay,
    And store of stones full precious from bucklers beaming sheen
    In those fierce shocks were scatter'd upon the trampled green.


XX

    Thence went the guests in order, and sat around the board;
    Many dainty dishes their wearied strength restor'd,
    And wine, of all the richest, their burning thirst allay'd:
    To friends alike and strangers was fitting honor pay'd.


XXI

    Albeit in ceaseless pastime they sent the livelong day,
    The mummers and the minstrels never ceas'd their play.
    They flock'd to golden largess, a roving frolic band,
    And pour'd a flood of praises on Siegmund's fertile land.


XXII

    The king, too, as his father to him before had done,
    Enfeoff'd with lands and castles Siegfried his youthful son;
    Gifts to his sword-companions he gave with liberal hand,
    So glad was he, it pleased them to come into his land.


XXIII

    The gorgeous feast it lasted till the seventh day was o'er;
    Siegelind the wealthy did as they did of yore;
    She won for valiant Siegfried the hearts of young and old,
    When for his sake among them she shower'd the ruddy gold.


XXIV

    You scarce could find one needy in all the minstrel band;
    Horses and robes were scatter'd with ever open hand.
    They gave as though they had not another day to live,
    None were to take so ready, as they inclin'd to give.


XXV

    So was dissolv'd with honor the mighty festival:
    The high-descended Barons assembled there in hall,
    That youth were well contented as lord to serve and sue,
    But that desir'd not Siegfried, the champion stout and true.


XXVI

    While Siegelind and Siegmund yet liv'd and flourished there,
    Full little reck'd their offspring the royal crown to wear.
    He only would be master and exercise command,
    'Gainst those whose pride o'erweening disturb'd the peaceful land.


XXVII

    None ventur'd to defy him; since weapons first he took,
    The bed of sloth but seldom the noble knight could brook.
    He only sought for battles; his prowess-gifted hand
    Won him renown eternal in every foreign strand.




THIRD ADVENTURE

HOW SIEGFRIED WENT TO WORMS


I

    'Twas seldom teen or sorrow the warrior's heart assay'd;
    At length he heard the rumor, how a lovely maid
    In Burgundy was dwelling, the fairest of the fair.
    From her he won much pleasure, but dash'd with toil and care.


III

    For all the host of suitors that sought to bend her will,
    True to her own coy promise remain'd fair Kriemhild still,
    That she, for all their wooing, would love vouchsafe to none.
    He was a distant stranger, who at last her favor won.


IV

    Then sought the son of Siegelind to gain the haughty fair;
    The vows of other suitors to his were light as air.
    Such knight deserv'd to vanquish the coyest maiden's pride;
    Ere long the noble Kriemhild became bold Siegfried's bride.


V

    His kinsmen and his liegemen then gave him counsel true,
    That now, if he in honor were inclin'd to woo,
    He should be bound in wedlock to no unequal make:
    Then said the noble Siegfried, "Sure will I fair Kriemhild take,


VI

    "The bright Burgundian maiden, best gem of Gunther's throne,
    Whose far-renowned beauty stands unapproach'd, alone;
    On earth nor king nor kaiser lives there so proud, I ween,
    But he might deem him happy to win so fair a queen."


VII

    Forthwith were the tidings to Siegmund's ear preferr'd;
    His anxious liegemen told him; from them his father heard
    The high design of Siegfried; it much to heart he laid,
    That he aspir'd so boldly to win so fair a maid.


VIII

    The news came eke to Siegelind, the noble monarch's wife;
    Full sore the mother trembled for her darling's life,
    For well she knew fierce Gunther and his vassals stern;
    So strove they both the champion from his high emprise to turn.


IX

    Then spake the valiant Siegfried, "Dearest father mine,
    The love of high-born women forever I'll resign,
    Rather than play the wooer but where my heart is set."
    Howe'er they sought to move him, but small success they met.


X

    "Since naught can then dissuade thee," outspake his royal sire,
    "Glad am I, blood of Siegmund should to such height aspire,
    And so thy hopes to forward I'll do the best I can;
    Yet in his court has Gunther many a proud o'erweening man.


XI

    "E'en were there none but Hagan, that redoubted knight
    In pride can match the proudest, the mightiest in might;
    So that, my son, I fear me, this hour we both may rue,
    If our minds are settled the stately maid to woo."


XII

    "What can ill befall us?" Siegfried made reply;
    "If that misproud Burgundian my friendly suit deny,
    Be sure, as much and more, too, I'll seize by strength of hand;
    In this I trust to strip him of liegemen and of land."


XIII

    "Little thy words content me," the hoary prince replied,
    "In the land of King Gunther thou sure durst never ride,
    If, on the Rhine, young Siegfried, this tale were only told.
    Gunther and eke Gernot I know them both of old.


XIV

    "By force, fair son, assure thee, can none the maiden woo,"
    Resum'd the princely Siegmund, "this I have heard for true;
    But if with knights to back thee, thou'lt ride to Gunther's land,
    We've friends enough, and forthwith I'll summon all the band."


XV

    "'Tis not to me well pleasing," the fiery youth replied,
    "That I the Rhine should visit with warriors by my side,
    As in array of battle, and 'twould my honor stain,
    If I should need assistance the peerless maid to gain.


XVI

    "I little care to win her save by my own good hand;
    With comrades but eleven I'll hence to Gunther's land.
    Thus far, father Siegmund, of you help I pray."
    Then his friends, to trim their garments, receiv'd striped furs
      and gray.


XVII

    To his mother Siegelind the heavy news they bore;
    The queen straight for her Siegfried began to sorrow sore.
    She shudder'd lest the lov'd one should all untimely die
    By the fierce knights of Gunther, and wept full bitterly.


XVIII

    Then in haste went Siegfried where she her moan did make,
    And thus his sobbing mother tenderly bespake,
    "Weep not for me, dear mother, in better hope repose,
    Count me forever scathless e'en 'midst a thousand foes.


XIX

    "So give me all that's needful through Burgundy to ride,
    That I and mine may journey with such fair weeds supplied
    As best becomes companions of high degree to wear,
    And from my heart I'll thank thee for all thy love and care."


XX

    "Since naught avails to stay thee," so spake his mother mild,
    "I'll equip thee for the journey, my dear, my only child,
    Thee and thy bold companions, and send thee richly dight
    With weeds the best and fairest that e'er were worn by knight."


XXI

    Then to the queen young Siegfried in duty bent him low,
    And said, "Upon this journey I would not that we go
    More than twelve together, so these with robes provide.
    Full fain am I to witness how stands it with my bride."


XXII

    Fair women at the needle were sitting night and day;
    Scarcely could a seamstress her head on pillow lay,
    Till robes were work'd for Siegfried and all his company.
    The youth was ever yearning to start for Burgundy.


XXIII

    His sire prepar'd his armor, and nothing left undone,
    That he might leave his country as fitted Siegmund's son;
    Well temper'd were their breast-plates that flash'd against the light,
    Of proof were their morions, their bucklers broad and bright.


XXIV

    Their way they now were ready to Burgundy to take;
    Then man and wife were heavy with sorrow for their sake,
    Lest evil should befall them, and bar their homeward road,
    With weapons and apparel the heroes bad the sumpters load.


XXV

    High-mettled were their chargers, gold-bright their riding weed,
    None ever rode more proudly (little were there need)
    Than then did noble Siegfried, and that fair company
    That with him leave were taking, all bound for Burgundy.


XXVI

    The king and queen, each weeping, gave him leave to part,
    And he to both gave comfort all with a loving heart.
    "Weep not," said he, "dear parents, of better courage be,
    I'm safe where'er I travel, so take no thought for me."


XXVII

    Ah! woe were then the warriors, and wept, too, many a maid,
    Their hearts, I ween, the future in deepest gloom array'd,
    And told them from that journey many a dear friend would bleed.
    Full cause had they for sorrow, it brought them woe indeed.


XXVIII

    On the seventh fair morning by Worms along the strand
    In knightly guise were pricking the death-defying band.
    The ruddy gold fair glitter'd on every riding vest;
    Their steeds they meetly govern'd, all pacing soft abreast.


XXIX

    Their shields were new and massy and like flame they glow'd,
    As bright too shone their helmets, while bold Siegfried rode
    Straight to the court of Gunther to woo the stately maid;
    Eye never look'd on champions so gorgeously array'd.


XXX

    Down to their spurs loud clanging reach'd the swords they wore;
    Sharp and well temper'd lances the chosen champions bore.
    One, two spans broad or better, did Siegfried sternly shake,
    With keen and cutting edges grim and ghastly wounds to make.


XXXI

    Their golden-color'd bridles firm they held in hand;
    Silken were their pÃ¶itrels; so rode they through the land.
    On all sides the people to gaze on them began;
    Then many of Gunther's liegemen swift to meet them ran.


XXXII

    Many a haughty warrior, stout squire, and hardy knight,
    Went to receive the strangers as fitting was and right,
    And, as to guests high honor'd, did courteous service yield,
    Their steeds held as they lighted, and took from each his shield.


XXXIII

    They were in act the chargers to lead away to stall,
    When the redoubted Siegfried quick to them did call,
    "Nay, leave us here the horses, we look not long to stay,
    Anon with my companions I shall wend upon my way.


XXXIV

    "Affairs of high concernment this squadron hither bring,
    So, whoso knows, straight tell me where I may find your king,
    The wide-renowned Gunther, who reigns in Burgundy."
    Then one who near was standing thus answer'd courteously,


XXXV

    "If you would find the monarch, you need not long to wait;
    In yonder hall at leisure myself I left him late
    Begirt with all his warriors; there you may feast your sight:
    In sooth you'll find about him full many a stately knight."


XXXVI

    Now to great King Gunther were the tidings told,
    That there had journey'd thither hardy knights and bold,
    Yclad in flashing armor and glittering vesture gay,
    But who and whence the strangers, could no Burgundian say.


XXXVII

    Much wonder'd the monarch, whence came the gallant band,
    That with so fair equipment had reach'd Burgundian land,
    And with so massy bucklers; that none could tidings bring
    Of those heroic strangers, but little pleas'd the king.


XXXVIII

    To Gunther then made answer the knight of Metz, Ortwine,
    A warrior bold and mighty, and of the loftiest line,
    "Since none of us can tell you who these same knights may be,
    Send for my uncle Hagan; let him strangers see.


XXXIX

    "He knows the proud and puissant of every foreign land;
    So we, what now we guess not, from him shall understand."
    Him and his warlike vassals the impatient king bade call,
    And soon redoubted Hagan strode tow'ring through the hall.


XL

    "What would the king with Hagan?" the warrior made demand.
    "Here in my house are wand'rers from some far-distant land,
    Unknown to all around me; observe the strangers well,
    And if thou e'er hast seen them, the truth, good Hagan, tell."


XLI

    "That will I straight," said Hagan; to a window then he went,
    And his eyes attentive on the strangers bent.
    Well pleas'd him their fair vesture, and well their armor sheen,
    Yet sure the like he never in Burgundy had seen.


XLII

    "Whencever come these champions whom chance to Rhineland brings,
    Kings might they be," said Hagan, "or messengers of kings.
    How highly bred their chargers! how gorgeous their array!
    Wherever lies their country, high-mettled lords are they."


XLIII
    And thereto added Hagan, "This too I'll vouch for yet;
    Albeit on noble Siegfried I never eyes have set;
    Still to aver I'll venture, that (let whate'er befall)
    'Tis he that's stalking yonder, so stately and so tall.


XLIV

    "He brings some new adventure to our Burgundian land;
    The valiant Nibelungers he slew by strength of hand,
    Nibelung and Shilbung the princes stern in fight,
    And since has many a wonder achiev'd with all-surpassing might.


XLV

    "As all alone and aidless he was riding once at will,
    As I have heard reported, he found beside a hill
    With Nibelung's hoarded treasure full many a man of might;
    Strange seem'd they to the champion, till he came to know them right.


XLVI

    "They had brought the treasure, as just then befell,
    Forth from a yawning cavern; now hear a wonder tell,
    How those fierce Nibelungers the treasure would divide;
    The noble Siegfried eyed them, and wonder'd as he eyed.


XLVII

    "He nearer came and nearer, close watching still the clan,
    Till they got sight of him too, when one of them began,
    'Here comes the stalwart Siegfried, the chief of Netherland.'
    A strange adventure met he with that Nibelungers' band.


XLVIII

    "Him well receiv'd the brethren Shilbung and Nibelung.
    With one accord they begg'd him, those noble princes young,
    To part the hoard betwixt them, and ever pressing bent
    The hero's wavering purpose till he yielded full consent.


XLIX

    "He saw of gems such plenty, drawn from that dark abode,
    That not a hundred wagons could bear the costly load,
    Still more of gold so ruddy from the Nibelungers' land.
    All this was to be parted by noble Siegfried's hand.


L
    "So Nibelung's sword they gave him to recompense his pain,
    But ill was done the service, which they had sought so fain,
    And he so hard had granted; Siegfried, the hero good,
    Fail'd the long task to finish; this stirr'd their angry mood.


LI

    "The treasure undivided he needs must let remain,
    When the two kings indignant set on him with their train,
    But Siegfried gripp'd sharp Balmung (so hight their father's sword),
    And took from them their country and the beaming precious hoard.


LII

    "For friends had they twelve champions, each, as avers my tale,
    A strong and sturdy giant, but what could all avail?
    All twelve to death successive smote Siegfried's mastering hand,
    And vanquish'd chiefs seven hundred of the Nibelungers' land.


LIII

    "With that good weapon Balmung; by sudden fear dismay'd
    Both of the forceful swordsman and of the sword he sway'd,
    Unnumber'd youthful heroes to Siegfried bent that hour,
    Themselves, their lands, their castles, submitting to his power.


LIV

    "Those two fierce kings together he there depriv'd of life,
    Then wag'd with puissant Albric a stern and dubious strife,
    Who thought to take full vengeance for both his masters slain,
    But found his might and manhood with Siegfried's match'd in vain.


LV

    "The mighty dwarf successless strove with the mightier man;
    Like to wild mountain lions to th' hollow hill they ran;
    He ravish'd there the cloud-cloak from struggling Albric's hold,
    And then became the master of th' hoarded gems and gold.


LVI

    "Whoever dar'd resist him, all by his sword lay slain,
    Then bade he bring the treasure back to the cave again,
    Whence the men of Nibelung the same before had stirr'd;
    On Albric last the office of keeper he conferr'd.


LVII

    "He took an oath to serve him, as his liegeman true,
    In all that to a master from his man is due.
    Such deeds," said he of Trony, "has conqu'ring Siegfried done;
    Be sure, such mighty puissance, knight has never won.


LVIII

    "Yet more I know of Siegfried, that well your ear may hold;
    A poison-spitting dragon he slew with courage bold,
    And in the blood then bath'd him; this turn'd to horn his skin.
    And now no weapons harm him, as often proved has been.


LIX

    "Receive then this young hero with all becoming state;
    'Twere ill advis'd to merit so fierce a champion's hate.
    So lovely is his presence, at once all hearts are won,
    And then his strength and courage such wondrous deeds have done."


LX

    Then spake the mighty monarch, "Thou counsellest aright.
    See how stands full knightly, prepar'd for fiercest fight,
    He and his hardy comrades, the death-defying man!
    Straight we'll descend to meet him as courteous as we can."


LXI

    "That be assur'd," said Hagan, "with honor may be done;
    Of lofty kin is Siegfried, a mighty monarch's son.
    Me seemeth, if to purpose his bearing I have eyed,
    By heaven, 'tis no light matter hath bidd'n him thither ride."


LXII

    Then spake the country's ruler, "He shall be welcome here,
    Bold is the knight and noble, that I discover clear,
    And much shall it avail him on our Burgundian ground."
    Then thither went King Gunther where he Siegfried found.


LXIII

    The host and his companions so well receiv'd the guest,
    That nothing there was wanting that courtesy express'd;
    And low inclin'd the warrior to all in presence there,
    Since they had giv'n him greeting so friendly and so fair.


LXIV

    "I wonder much," said Gunther, "and fain would understand,
    Whence comes the noble Siegfried to this Burgundian land,
    And what he here is seeking at Worms upon the Rhine."
    The guest to the king made answer, "Concealment is no art of mine.


LXV

    "Afar I heard the tidings, e'en in my father's land,
    That here with you were dwelling (fain would I know the band)
    The best and prowest champions so voic'd by all and some,
    That ever king surrounded; I'm therefore hither come.


LXVI

    "Your own renown I've heard, too, through all this country ring,
    That never eye of mortal has seen so bold a king.
    Your prowess and your knighthood are vouch'd by high and low,
    Now ne'er will I turn homeward till this by proof I know.


LXVII

    "I too am a warrior, and shall a sceptre sway,
    And I would fain bring all men perforce of me to say,
    That I both land and liegemen have nobly merited.
    This to maintain I'll freely pledge, my honor and my head.


LXVIII

    "Now since you are so famous for manhood and for skill,
    Naught reck I, if my purpose be taken well or ill,
    But all that's own'd by Gunther I'll win by strength of hand,
    And force to my obedience his castles and his land."


LXIX

    The king was lost in wonder, and with him all the rest,
    At such a strange pretension from that o'erweening guest,
    Who claim'd his whole possessions that stretch'd so wide around.
    His vassals heard the challenge, and for anger sternly frown'd.


LXX

    "How," cried the valiant Gunther, "have I deserv'd this wrong,
    That what my noble father with honor rul'd so long,
    I now should yield to any, o'ermaster'd by his might?
    Ill should I show, that I too can bear me like a knight!"


LXXI

    "I'll ne'er renounce my purpose," the fiery youth replied;
    "If through thy might thy country cannot in peace abide,    I'll take on me 
to rule it, and what I hold in fee,
    If thou by strength canst take it, shall alike submit to thee.


LXXII

    "Let thy broad lands and mine too be laid in equal scale,
    And whichsoe'er in battle o'er th' other shall prevail,
    To him let all be subject, the liegemen and the land."
    But Hagan sought, and Gernot, such purpose to withstand.


LXXIII

    "To us 'tis little pleasing," Gernot made reply,
    "That we should lands be seizing, whose lords should slaughter'd lie
    That we may win unjustly; our lands are fair and wide;
    We are their rightful masters, and none they need beside."


LXXIV

    Grim glar'd King Gunther's warriors (of gathering wrath the sign!)
    Among them lower'd the darkest the knight of Metz, Ortwine.
    "It irks me much," exclaim'd he, "to hear these words of pride.
    Sir King! by haughty Siegfried thou'rt wrongfully defied.


LXXV

    "Were thou and thy brave brethren stript of those arms you boast,
    While he to back his quarrel should bring a royal host,
    E'en then I'd trust to teach him a humbler pitch to fly,
    And cower as low before us, as now he mounteth high."


LXXVI

    Wroth was at this defiance the chief of Netherland.
    He cried, "Thou durst not venture 'gainst me to lift thy hand.
    I am a mighty monarch, a monarch's man art thou;
    Should twelve like thee resist me, twelve such to one should bow."


LXXVII

    Then 'gan for swords call loudly the knight of Metz, Ortwine,
    The sister's son of Hagan, pride of his lofty line.
    It irk'd him that his uncle so long had silent stood.
    Bold Gernot interposing thus cool'd his fiery mood.


LXXVIII

    "Ortwine!" said he, "be calmer; why thus to weapons run?    To us the 
valiant stranger no such offence has done.
    We yet may part in kindness; I rede thee, wrath give o'er,
    And make a friend of Siegfried; this still were to our credit more."


LXXIX

    "It well may irk," said Hagan, "all us good knights of thine,
    That this imperious wanderer e'er rode unto the Rhine.
    Such strife-producing journey were better ne'er begun.
    Ne'er had the kings my masters by him so evil done."


LXXX

    Thereto straight answer'd Siegfried, fiercely frowning still,
    "If these my words, Sir Hagan, have chanc'd to please you ill,
    Be sure, high deeds of valor, you at these hands shall see,
    Deeds, that e'en less may please you here in Burgundy."


LXXXI

    "This I alone," said Gernot, "can turn from evil end;"
    So all his warriors bade he the stranger not offend
    With words that breath'd defiance, and thus the turmoil stay'd;
    And Siegfried too was thinking upon the stately maid.


LXXXII

    "How suits this strife with either?" the prudent warrior said,
    "How many chiefs soever should in this broil lie dead,
    By us would little honor, by you small gain be won."
    Thereto gave answer Siegfried, King Siegmund's haughty son:


LXXXIII

    "But wherefore lingereth Hagan, and wherefore proud Ortwine,
    That, with their friends thus swarming upon the banks of Rhine,
    Nor one, nor other ventures a stranger's arm to brave?"
    Both kept unwilling silence, such counsel Gernot gave.


LXXXIV

    "You shall to us be welcome," resum'd Queen Uta's son,
    "You and your faithful comrades, all and every one.
    We shall be proud to serve you, I and all kin of mine,"
    Then for the guests 'twas order'd to pour King Gunther's wine.


LXXXV
    Then spoke the sov'reign ruler, "Whatever ours we call,
    Should you in honor claim it, is at your service all--
    Our persons--our possessions--if so it seems you good."
    Thereat became Sir Siegfried of somewhat milder mood.


LXXXVI

    Forthwith their whole equipment down from their beasts was brought;
    For Siegfried and his fellows with fitting zeal were sought
    Of all convenient chambers the choicest and the best.
    At length the bold Burgundians look'd friendly on their guest.


LXXXVII

    Thenceforth were fitting honors paid him many a day,
    A thousand-fold, be certain more than I can say.
    This earn'd his strength and valor; so gracious was his state,
    'Twas rare that any mortal could look on him with hate.


LXXXVIII

    Their hours they spent in pastime--the kings and all the rest--
    Whate'er the sport that pleas'd them, 'twas Siegfried play'd it best.
    Such was his skill and puissance, that none could come him near
    To hurl the stone tempestuous or dart the whizzing spear.


LXXXIX

    Whene'er before the ladies, all in courtly guise,
    Plied the contending champions their knightly exercise,
    Then all look'd on delighted as noble Siegfried strove;
    But he his thoughts kept ever fix'd on his lofty love.


XC

    At court the lovely ladies were asking evermore,
    Who was the stately stranger that so rich vesture wore,
    At once so fair of presence and so strong of hand.
    Then many a one gave answer, "'Tis the King of Netherland."


XCI

    He ever was the foremost, whate'er the game they play'd.
    Still in his inmost bosom he bore one lovely maid,
    Whom he beheld had never, and yet to all preferr'd;
    She too of him in secret spoke many a kindly word.


XCII

    When in the court contending fierce squire and hardy knight,
    As fits the young and noble, wag'd the mimic fight,
    Oft Kriemhild through her window would look, herself unseen:
    Then no other pleasure needed the gentle queen.


XCIII

    What then had been his rapture, could he have only guess'd,
    That on him she was looking, who reign'd within his breast!
    Could he but once have seen her, I ween, not all the bliss,
    That all the world can lavish, would he have ta'en for this.


XCIV

    Whene'er, as is the custom at intervals of sport,
    He midst the crowd of heroes was standing in the court,
    So graceful was the bearing of Siegelind's matchless son,
    That the heart of every lady that look'd on him he won.


XCV

    Oft too would he be thinking, "How now can it be,
    That I the noble maiden with mine eyes may see,
    Whom I in heart love dearly, and so long have done?
    And she's an utter stranger! Ah! Woe is me, unhappy one!"


XCVI

    Whene'er the kings it needed through their land to ride,
    Then kept their faithful liegemen attendance by their side,
    And with them forth must Siegfried; this irk'd his lady sore;
    He through her love was pining the while as much or more.


XCVII

    So with those kings, high honor'd Siegmund's noble son
    In Gunther's land was dwelling till full a year was run,
    Nor, all that weary season, a single glimpse could gain
    Of her, who after brought him such pleasure and such pain.




FOURTH ADVENTURE

HOW SIEGFRIED FOUGHT WITH THE SAXONS


I

    Now strange and stirring tidings were brought to Gunther's throne
    By messengers commissioned from foreign chiefs unknown,
    Who bore the brethren malice, and whom they well might fear.
    When they receiv'd the message, right heavy was their cheer.


II

    The same I now will tell you; King Ludeger the bold,
    From the land of the Saxons (a mightier ne'er was told)
    Was leagued with him of Denmark, King Ludegast the strong,
    And many a famous warrior both brought with them along.


III

    Their messengers, hard riding, came to King Gunther's land,
    As his far-distant foemen had given them in command;
    Then ask'd the crowd, what tidings the unknown guests might bring.
    To court they straight were hurried, and set before the king.


IV

    Them well the monarch greeted: "You're welcome; never fear;
    From whom you come, I know not, but willingly would hear,
    And it is yours to tell me." So spake the monarch good.
    Then 'gan they sore to tremble at Gunther's angry mood.


V

    "Since you, O king! permit us to utter plain and true
    This our high commission, naught will we hide from you.
    Our masters we will tell you, who gave us this command.
    King Ludegast and King Ludeger will visit you in this land.


VI

    "You have deserved their anger; for truth can I relate,
    That both our puissant masters bear you deadly hate.
    They'll lead a host unnumber'd to Worms unto the Rhine.
    Of this be warn'd for certain; fix'd is their proud design.


VII

    "Within twelve weeks at farthest their camp will onward go;
    If you've good friends to aid you, 'twill soon be time to show.
    Their best will sure be needed to guard both fort and field,
    Soon shall we here be shiv'ring many a helm and many a shield.


VIII

    "Or would you seek a treaty, let it at once be said,
    Ere their prevailing myriads, one wasteful ruin spread
    Through all your wide dominions with their consuming might,
    And Death unsated feast him on many a gallant knight."


IX

    "Now wait awhile, ye strangers," thus spake the noble king,
    "I must think, ere I answer the message that you bring.
    I've friends and faithful liegemen, whose sage advice I use,
    And with them I must counsel take on this heavy news."


X

    The nigh approaching danger irk'd King Gunther sore,
    And the proud defiance deep in heart he bore;
    He sent for valiant Hagan and many another knight,
    And Gernot, too, bade hasten with all the speed he might.


XI

    At once they flock'd around him, a stern and stately band;
    Then spake the king, "Proud strangers, here, in our own good land,
    Have sent to bid us battle; weigh well such tidings told."
    Thereto straight answer'd Gernot, a hardy knight and bold.


XII

    "Then with our swords we'll meet them; defiance we'll defy;
    None but the death-doom'd perish, so bravely let them die;
    I'll ne'er forget my honor for all they choose to send.
    So fierce a foe to Gernot is welcome as a friend."


XIII

    "Rash hold I such hot counsel," said Hagan, Trony's knight,
    "Both Ludegast and Ludeger are men of mickle might:
    In so few days our vassals we scarce can muster well."
    He paused a space, then added, "The news to Siegfried tell."


XIV

    Meanwhile they lodg'd the strangers within the city fair;
    Though all were foes around them, King Gunther bade them share
    All courteous entertainment; so fitly dealt the king,
    Till he had learn'd, what forces he might together bring.


XV

    Right ill at ease was Gunther; his brow was clouded o'er;
    A gallant knight, who mark'd him what heavy cheer he bore,
    Who had not heard the tidings, nor thus the truth could guess,
    With friendly will thus mov'd him his sorrow to confess.


XVI

    "I wonder much," said Siegfried, "why I of late have seen
    With care so overshadow'd that frank and merry mien,
    That gave a zest to pleasure, and heighten'd each delight."
    Whereto gave answer Gunther the far-renowned knight;


XVII

    "To all the world I cannot my bitter bale impart;
    Bear it I must, and wrap it close in my inmost heart.
    Bosom woes can only to bosom friends be said."
    Thereat the hue of Siegfried wax'd both white and red.


XVIII

    He thus bespake the monarch, "I ne'er denied you aught,
    And now will serve you truly, whate'er be in your thought.
    Need you friends, King Gunther? no firmer friend than I.
    Is it a deed of danger? I'll do it, or I'll die."


XIX

    "Now God reward you, Siegfried; your words they please me well;
    E'en should your strength avail not this danger to repel,
    There's comfort in such friendship as you have shown to-day.
    Let me live a little longer, well will I all repay.


XX

    "And now my source of sorrow, Sir Siegfried, you shall know;
    It comes of two proud princes, each my deadly foe,
    Who me with war would visit, and all my lands o'errun,
    A deed that here by warrior before was never done."


XXI

    "Take little thought," said Siegfried, "of them and their emprise;
    Calm but your anxious spirit, and do as I advise.
    Let me for you advantage as well as honor win,
    And bid at once to aid you your warriors hasten in.


XXII

    "If your o'erweening foemen can together call
    Thirty thousand champions, I'll stand against them all
    With but a single thousand; for that rely on me."
    "For this," replied King Gunther, "I'm ever bound to thee."


XXIII

    "So from your army give me a thousand men at most,
    Since I, who well could muster at home a gallant host,
    Have here twelve comrades only; thus will I guard your land.
    Count on true service ever from Siegfried's faithful hand.


XXIV

    "And Hagan too shall help us, and with him stout Ortwine,
    Dankwart and Sindolt those loving lords of thine,
    And fear-defying Folker shall our companion be;
    He shall bear our banner; better none than he."


XXV

    And forthwith did the envoys back to their lords return:
    "Tell them they soon shall see us, and to their cost shall learn
    How we devise protection for castle and for town."
    Straight call'd the king his kinsmen and the suitors of his crown.


XXVI

    The messengers of Ludeger before th' assembly went;
    They heard with joy and gladness that home they would be sent.
    With costly presents Gunther their parting steps pursued,
    And with them sent an escort; this rais'd full high their mood.


XXVII

    "Ye messengers," said Gunther, "thus to your masters say,
    They'd best be pricking homeward as quickly as they may;
    Or, should they please to seek us among our liegemen true,
    Let but our friends be faithful, we'll find them work to do."


XXVIII

    Then forth the costly presents to the messengers they bore;
    Enough, be sure, and more, too, King Gunther had in store.
    King Ludeger's men to take them in sooth were nothing coy;
    Then leave they took of Gunther, and parted thence with joy.


XXIX

    Now when back to Denmark were come the envoys bold,
    And to the stout King Ludegast had the tidings told,
    How they of Rhine were coming, fierce war themselves to bring,
    To hear of their high courage troubled sore the king.


XXX

    Said they, "Yon proud Burgundian has many a man of might,
    But for the first and foremost we mark'd a matchless knight,
    One that men call Siegfried, a chief of Netherland."
    Ill foreboded Ludegast from such a foe at hand.


XXXI

    When to them of Denmark were these tidings told,
    The more their friends they summon'd to muster manifold,
    Nor press nor hasty message did stout Sir Ludegast slack,
    Till twenty thousand champions were marching at his back.


XXXII

    Alike to brave Sir Ludeger did his Saxons throng,
    Till they in arms had gather'd full forty thousand strong,
    Ready at his bidding through Burgundy to ride,
    Nor less at home did Gunther his men at arms provide.


XXXIII

    His kinsmen and his brethren he begg'd at once to speed,
    And to the war that dar'd them their muster'd vassals lead,
    And death-defying Hagan; they gather'd far and nigh.
    Full many a chief thereafter that journey brought to die.


XXXIV

    They one and all were stirring; no loiterer was there;
    The danger-daring Folker the standard was to bear.
    To cross the Rhine they purpos'd and leave their native land.
    Hagan the knight of Trony was marshal of the band.


XXXV

    With them, too, rode Sindolt, and with them Hunolt bold,
    Both resolv'd by service to earn King Gunther's gold,
    And Dankwart, Hagan's brother, and the brave Ortwine,
    Alike would seek for honor in the march beyond the Rhine.


XXXVI

    "Sir King," said noble Siegfried, "here sit at home and play,
    While I and your vassals are fighting far away;
    Here frolic with the ladies and many a merry mate,
    And trust to me for guarding your honor and estate.


XXXVII

    "Those foes of yours, that threaten'd as far as Worms to roam,
    I will be their surety, that they shall bide at home.
    So deep within their country we are resolv'd to ride,
    To wail shall turn their vaunting, to penitence their pride."


XXXVIII

    From Rhine through Hesse advancing they rode upon their way,
    Toward the Saxon country, where after happ'd the fray.
    Far and wide they ravag'd, and fiery brands they toss'd,
    Till both the princes heard it and felt it to their cost.


XXXIX

    They now were on the borders; then hasten'd every man,
    When the stalwart Siegfried thus to ask began:
    "Who shall be appointed to guard our company?
    Sure ne'er was raid that threaten'd such ill to Saxony."


XL

    They answered, "Let to Dankwart the charge committed be
    To guard the young and heedless; more nimble none than he.
    We thus the less shall suffer from aught our foes design.
    To him commit the rearward, and with him too Ortwine."


XLI

    "Myself alone," said Siegfried, "will ever forward ride,
    Till I have found our foemen and all their strength espied.
    Keep watch and ward unceasing till I this task have done."
    Then donn'd at once his armor fair Siegelind's martial son.


XLII

    At parting he his people in charge to Hagan gave,
    And with him eke to Gernot the prudent and the brave;
    Then all alone went riding through the wide Saxon realm;
    And soon that day he shatter'd the band of many a helm.


XLIII

    That mighty host next spied he, as wide encamp'd it lay.
    It might his single puissance a hundred-fold outweigh.
    Better than forty thousand were muster'd there for fight,
    Sir Siegfried mark'd their numbers, and gladden'd at the sight.


XLIV

    Before the camp he noted a knight, that on his ground
    Strong watch and ward kept heedful, and peer'd on all around.
    At once of him was Siegfried, and he of Siegfried ware,
    And each began on the other angrily to glare.


XLV

    Who was this watchful warder, now you shall be told.
    At hand by him lay ready a flashing shield of gold.
    Twas e'en the stout King Ludegast, that watch'd his gather'd might.
    Fiercely upon the monarch sprung the stranger knight.


XLVI

    As fiercely too against him the fiery monarch sped;
    In the flank of the war-horse each dash'd the rowels red:
    The lance with all his puissance each level'd at the shield.
    Ill chance befell King Ludegast in that disastrous field.


XLVII

    Beneath the spur blood-dripping the steeds together flew;
    Champion clos'd with champion as though a tempest blew.
    Then wheel'd they round full knightly; each well the bridle sway'd
    Again they met unsated, and with blade encounter'd blade.


XLVIII

    Such strokes there struck Sir Siegfried, that all the field it rang;
    At each, as e'en from torches, the fire-red sparkles sprang
    From Ludegast's batter'd helmet. So strive they all they can
    And either stormy champion in th' other finds his man.


XLIX

    At Siegfried too Sir Ludegast struck many a sturdy stroke;
    Each on his foeman's buckler his gather'd fury broke.
    Full thirty men of Ludegast's meanwhile had spied the fray,
    But, ere they up could hasten, Siegfried had won the day.


L

    Thrice smote he the bright breast-plate, and pierc'd it through
      and through;
    Thrice the blood in torrents from the king he drew,
    Those three strokes have ended that encounter keen.
    Down sunk woful Ludegast grovelling on the green.


LI

    He straight for life sued humbly, and yielded up his claim
    To all his lands, and told him that Ludegast was his name.
    On this up came his warriors, who from afar had seen
    The fight, that at the ward-post so fiercely fought had been.


LII

    Thence Siegfried thought to bring him, when sudden all the band
    Of thirty set upon him; well then the hero's hand
    Maintain'd his royal captive with many a mighty blow.
    The peerless champion wrought them yet heavier loss and woe.


LIII

    He fought with all the thirty till all but one were slain;
    To him his life he granted; he trembling rode amain,
    And told the truth disastrous to all the gaping crew;
    On his bloody helmet they might see it written, too.


LIV

    Woe were the men of Denmark to hear the deadly tale;
    Their king too was a captive; this added bale to bale.
    They told it to his brother; he straight to storm began.
    Wroth was he to have suffered such loss by arm of man.


LV

    So by the might of Siegfried was Ludegast led away
    To where the men of Gunther in watchful leaguer lay,
    And given in charge to Hagan; when they came to hear
    The prisoner was King Ludegast, they scarcely shed a tear.


LVI

    Now rear they bade the banner the bold Burgundian crew.
    "Up!" cried the son of Siegelind, "more will be yet to do,
    If there be life in Siegfried, and that ere day be done.
    Woe to the Saxon mothers! they'll weep for many a son.


LVII

    "Ye hardy knights of Rhineland, take of me good heed.
    Right through the ranks of Ludeger your valor will I lead.
    You'll see by hands of heroes helmets cleft amain.
    Shame shall they learn and sorrow ere we ride home again."


LVIII

    At once to horse good Gernot and all his meiny sprung,
    At once the glittering banner to the breeze was flung
    By the bold minstrel Folker riding in the van;
    So moved they on to battle, war-breathing every man.


LIX

    No more than e'en a thousand went on the hard emprise;
    With them twelve stranger champions. Now 'gan the dust arise
    Along the paths they trampled; they rode by copse and field
    And startled all the country with the flash of many a shield.


LX

    Against them with their myriads came on the Saxons bold.
    Their swords they well were sharpen'd, as I have since been told.
    Keen cut the temper'd weapons in their well-practised hands,
    To guard from those fierce strangers their castles and their lands.


LXI

    The war-directing marshal led on the troop amain,
    And thither too fierce Siegfried brought up the scanty train,
    That had his fortunes follow'd from distant Netherland.
    Busied that day in battle was many a bloody hand.


LXII

    Sindolt and Hunolt and noble Gernot too
    In the fierce encounter many a champion slew,
    Who, ere they felt their puissance, little thought to quail;
    Many a noble lady then had cause to wail.


LXIII

    Folker and Hagan, and eke the fierce Ortwine,
    Death-defying champions, dimm'd many a helmet's shine
    With bloody streaming torrents that down began to run;
    There too were by Dankwart mighty marvels done.


LXIV

    Every man of Denmark frankly tried his hand;
    You might have heard a clatter ring throughout the land
    Of shiver'd shields and sword-blades; 'sooth the work was rough,
    And the hurtling Saxons damage did enough.


LXV

    Where the stern Burgundians plung'd into the strife,
    Many a wound was given, and let out many a life.
    The blood from that red slaughter above the saddles stood;
    Woo'd as a bride was honor by heroes bold and good.


LXVI

    But louder still and louder in every hero's hand
    Clash'd the keen-ground weapons, when those of Netherland
    Behind their charging master rush'd into the fight.
    On they came with Siegfried; each bore him as a knight.


LXVII

    Not a lord of Rhineland could follow where he flew.
    You might see red spouting the riven helmets through
    Sudden streams of slaughter where Siegfried smote around,
    Till he at last King Ludeger before his comrades found.


LXVIII

    Thrice pierc'd he through the Saxons, and thrice return'd again,
    From van to utmost rear-guard still trampling down the slain;
    Nor was it long, ere Hagan came up his part to bear.
    Down then must proudest champions before th' unconquer'd pair.


LXIX

    When the stalwart Ludeger saw noble Siegfried nigh,
    Who in his hand wide-wasting ever heav'd on high
    The storm-descending Balmung, and slew him many a slain,
    Grimly frown'd the monarch, and burn'd with wrath amain.


LXX

    Dire was the storm and struggle, and loud the sword-blades clash'd,
    When both the thick battalions each on the other dash'd,
    Each angry leader panting to meet in stern debate.
    The crowd began to scatter; then fiercer rose their hate.


LXXI

    Well the Saxon ruler that day perform'd his part;
    To know his brother taken cut him to the heart.
    He heard it first reported, Gernot the deed had done,
    But now he knew for certain, 'twas Siegelind's conqu'ring son.


LXXII

    So burly were the buffets which Ludeger dealt in field,
    That Siegfried's panting charger under the saddle reel'd.
    Soon as the steed recover'd, a fiercer passion stirr'd
    His angry lord, and hotter through the red press he spurr'd.


LXXIII

    Then up to help him Hagan, and up good Gernot sped,
    Dankwart and Folker; round lay in heaps the dead;
    And Sindolt came, and Hunolt, and the good knight Ortwine.
    Down sunk the Saxons trampled by the warriors of the Rhine.


LXXIV

    Close fought the chiefs, unsever'd 'spite of the hurtling bands
    Then might you see the lances from mightiest heroes' hands
    Fly o'er the nodding helmets, and pierce the bucklers through;
    Many a glittering armor was dyed a bloody hue.


LXXV

    In the fierce encounter many a mighty man
    Tumbled from the saddle; each on th' other ran
    Ludeger and Siegfried, each the other's peer;
    Many a shaft was flying, whizzing many a spear.


LXXVI

    Off flew Ludeger's shield-plate by dint of Siegfried'